our rituals are constantly evolving
riding a wave of energy across the sea
is one of the ways humans have found to
connect to great natural power
but some surfers have taken this
connection to nature to the limit
big wave surfing is extreme
where people attempt to ride waves over
seven meters tall
many a far bigger
nazaré Portugal
some of the greatest waves on the planet
erupted from the Seas here
they are so huge powerful and dangerous
that no one thought it possible to ride
one
that is until Garrett McNamara arrived
in 2011 he wrote a record-breaker
at 23 meters it was the biggest wave
ever surfed
when you're out there in the middle of
massive waves you feel so connected to
everything you feel part of everything
you're really becoming one with nature
since his record-breaking Garrett and a
handful of other surfers have joined
together to surf bigger and bigger waves
establishing Nazare as a global mecca
for big wave surfing
but it's only been possible for them by
drawing on the power of rituals take
three big breaths in and receive all
that energy performed on either land or
sea this is the big wave surfers reset
ritual
you breathe in your stomach and into
your chest and then there's another 15
to 25 percent more oxygen when you tell
your head back into your shoulders and
then you fill up with all fresh air
fresh energy thought the Concord
Coquette with no fumes but it's
commonness and well most simple fuse em
simplify them
since its origin 3,000 years ago
Polynesia surfing and rituals have gone
hand in hand
the best wave riders were kings
making a surfboard was a spiritual
ceremony
and priests would pray for waves to ride
so it's no surprise that these surfers
prepare themselves to take on the giant
waves with their own ceremonies drawing
on ancient rituals that help focus body
and mind you reset your mind get rid of
everything refocus on what you want I
wasn't raised a religious person and but
I do believe in something greater than
us with the ocean and the power and
everything you've got to have belief in
something when you're not connected
that's when things go wrong
six months ago Garrett neglected his
ritual to his cost
that didn't reset I wasn't focused ended
up paying the price the force of the
impact when I hit that water was like
he's submit and it just shattered my
shoulder in the 10 pieces plan it's
october in nazareth the start of the big
wave season after his injury garrett
isn't yet ready to surf giant waves but
his experience is essential to help the
others to realize their dreams
the surface and their families have
gathered together and they're tracking
the incoming swell can we pull up buoy
weather and see what the outer buoy is
showing you wanna see the outer boy
service there's a monitoring device far
out at sea which allows them to predict
the size of the waves they could face
over the coming days
Carter you gotta see this
[Music]
a giant swell is heading straight for
Nazare
whoo this could be one of those once in
our half a decade swallows it you might
never get again you know so I think it's
um it's definitely worth a chance if if
it looks like it's doable
before the surfers came here only the
local fishermen braved these waters
timer is neutral tomorrow
Kocher familia Kadena Sara 10 months
limits Jaffa saruman UGA Tifton by move
oh yo she was in the main produce
company atta boy
since humans first set out to see
they've turned to rituals to help them
feel safe confirm our wisdom simple
model and former candy walnut
[Music]
fondue MRSA lab minggaang la vie social
fishing
keep on Tessa my boss or proto's equal
AB or speaking
[Music]
across the season monster waves arrive
at Nazeri giving the big wave surfers
their opportunities hundreds of people
gather to witness them take on the
world's largest waves
as always before they enter the fray the
surfers carry out their reset ritual
[Music]
para 1mm sentiment the Prescott Empire
Israel to your own sermon
[Music]
it's a good way
all the surfers are chasing a fleeting
moment of connection with the raw power
of the ocean
there's a beautiful saying honey a
surfing those a feeling and it's really
true
[Music]
it felt good it felt amazing to be in
there helping to being a part of it all
to be able to enjoy that so pure so much
power
[Music]
these surfers have been able to take on
what was once thought impossible thanks
to the power of rituals